#summary Downloading the nairn-mpm-fea project
#labels Featured,Getting_Started

<font color="red">This page has been moved to <a href="http://osupdocs.forestry.oregonstate.edu/index.php/Download_Source_Code">OSUPDocs Wiki</a></font>

= Introduction =

You must use `Subversion` (or `svn`) on your local computer to download the entire `nairn-mpm-fea` project from `GoogleCode.com`. The `svn` package is available for Mac and Linux as a command-line tool (see <a href="http://subversion.tigris.org/">tigris.org</a> if you need to install it). For Windows, one solution is to [Windows_Setup set up `cygwin`] and use its version of `svn`. In each platform there may by other `svn` options as well, but this page is based on the command-line approach.

Once you have `svn` installed, you can either do an [#Anonymous_Checkout anonymous checkout] or a [#Password_Enabled_Checkout password enabled check]. Both these methods listed below get the latest or development version. To get and older version (in case development version has issues), you can [Project_Versions download a stable prior version instead].

=Anonymous Checkout=

For a public, anonymous checkout of `nairn-mpm-fea`, use the command line:

{{{
svn checkout http://nairn-mpm-fea.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/ nairn-mpm-fea-read-only
}}}

Here `nairn-mpm-fea-read-only` is the name of the folder that will be created with the checked out code. You can use any name you want.

Once you have the code, open the `index.html` file in the Documentation folder to learn how to compile all code, run calculations, and visualize the results.

=Password Enabled Checkout=

If you might want to contribute changes to the `nairn-mpm-fea` project, including changes to documentation or the project's wiki pages, or if you just want to have a visible presence in use of the code, you should checkout with a username and password. But first, you need a password. The process is:

  # Participating in any `GoogleCode.com` project requires a google account and a gmail email addess. If you do not have one, you can create one for free at <a href="http://www.google.com">`google.com`</a>. If you already have a google account, you can easily add an email address, if needed.
  # Email you google gmail address to `<John.Nairn@oregonstate.edu>` with a request to be a committer (ability to make changes) or a contributer (to be added as a visible user of the code). You will be emailed back when you have been added to the project.
  # Once you hear back sign in to your google account and find your profile in the `GoogleCode.com` section. The "My Profile" tab there will show your username (from your gmail address) and the "Settings" tab will show your `GoogleCode.com` password. Make of note of this generated password, because it is needed for the checkout.

These above steps only need to be done once. Once they are done, you can use `svn` to check out a copy of the project with:

{{{
svn checkout https://nairn-mpm-fea.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/ nairn-mpm-fea --username YOURUSERNAME
}}}

or if SSL connection is not enabled, you can instead use

{{{
svn checkout http://nairn-mpm-fea.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/ nairn-mpm-fea --username YOURUSERNAME
}}}

Here `nairn-mpm-fea` is the name of the folder that will be created with the checked out code. You can use any name you want. Also `YOURUSERNAME` is the username you obtained in step #3 above. After giving this command, you will need to enter the password from step #3 to finish the checkout.

Once you have the code, open the `index.html` file in the Documentation folder to learn how to compile all code, run calculations, and visualize the results.

=Checkout a Branch=

From time to time, `nairn-mpm-fea` will use branches, such as to work on special features or as a coding area for project committers working on their own code features. To check out a branch using a password (which is most common), use:

{{{
svn checkout https://nairn-mpm-fea.googlecode.com/svn/branches/branch_name nairn-mpm-fea-branch_name --username YOURUSERNAME
}}}

where `branch_name` is the name of the branch (if `https` does not work, use `http` instead).