#summary List of available versions for check out
#labels NairnMPM,NairnFEA

= Introduction =

The main `trunk` of the project contains the working code; a [Download_Project standard check out] gets this version. Since this code is computational mechanics research software, the main `trunk` may occasionally have issues or incomplete features. To help avoid such issues, various complete releases are `tagged` and can be checked out instead while waiting for main `trunk` to reach a stable condition.

=Nairn-MPM-FEA Tagged Releases=

==Checking Out a Tagged Version==

To check out a tagged release instead of the current development release, simply change the path in the checkout command. For example, an anonymous check out would be:

{{{
svn checkout http://nairn-mpm-fea.googlecode.com/svn/tags/release-1.0 nairn-mpm-fea-1.0
}}}

where the final component in the path is the version you want. See [#Tagged_Versions below] for a list of available tagged versions.

==Checking Out by Version Number or Date==

In addition to tagged versions, you can revert to any revision number or to the version on any date with the follow check out commands:

{{{
svn checkout --revision 185 http://nairn-mpm-fea.googlecode.com/svn/trunk nairn-mpm-fea-185
svn checkout --revision {2010-05-11} http://nairn-mpm-fea.googlecode.com/svn/trunk nairn-mpm-fea-2010-05-11
}}}

Every change to the code makes a new revision number. You can look up revision numbers in the "Source" tab. A checkout by date means the revision that was current on that date. You can add a time if several revisions were made that day. When an `svn` checkout by date finishes, it will report the revision number that you received. Using revision number when looking for changes is more efficient because you are sure things changed. Checking out versions on different dates will give identical code if no changes were made between those dates. Furthermore, many revisions differ only in comments or documentation and not in source code. Here is a [Unique_MPM_Revisions  partial list] that can be used to locate which revisions changed the source code.

==Tagging a Version by Committers==

When the current main `trunk` is stable, you can store a tagged version with the command

{{{
svn copy https://nairn-mpm-fea.googlecode.com/svn/trunk \
      https://nairn-mpm-fea.googlecode.com/svn/tags/release-2.2 \
      -m "Tagging stable release 2.2"
}}}

where you enter any unused release number.


==Tagged Versions==

The project `nairn-mpm-fea` was first imported to `GoogleCode.com` in December 2009. The first imported version was tagged as release 1.0. The following table lists tag, dates, and version numbers of subcomponents for all available tagged versions:

|| Tag || Date || NairnMPM Version || NairnFEA Version || NairnFEAMPMViz Version ||
|| release-3.0 || 25 JAN 2012 || 8.2.0 || 2.9.0 || 3.3.0 ||
|| release-2.0 || 25 JUL 2010 || 7.3.0 || 2.7.1 || 3.1.0 ||
|| release-1.0 || 30 DEC 2009 || 7.2.0 || 2.7.0 || 3.0.0 ||