#summary Setting up cygwin to download and and use nairn-mpm-fea.
#labels Featured

= Introduction =

The `nairn-mpm-fea` projects runs well in Windows by using the <a href="http://www.cygwin.com">cygwin setup.exe</a> system. You can download this project, compile the code, run calculations, and visualize the results.

= Setting up `cygwin` =

The recommended approach to using `nairn-mpm-fea` in Windows is to use `cygwin` and this page gives the step-by-step process for the required setup. This process has been verified in Windows XP, Windows Vista and Windows 7 (although you may need the latest `cygwin 1.7` for Windows 7).

  # Download the <a href="http://www.cygwin.com">cygwin setup.exe</a> application and run it (to install `cygwin` or, if you already have `cygwin` installed, you still might need to install plug-ins listed below, if you do not have them already).
  # Follow the default options until you reach the "Packages" step of the `cygwin` setup wizard. In that step, expand the "Devel" category and select:
    * `g++` - the gnu c++ compiler
    * `gdb` - the gnu debugger (optional)
    * `make` - program for making files (the `NairnMPM` and `NairnFEA` binaries)
    * `Subversion` - the version control system needed to download code from `GoogleCode.com`.
  # Next, expand the "Net" category and select:
    * `openssh` - ssh command for secure remote connections (optional).
  # Finally, expand the "Editors" section and select  a command-line editer (_e.g._, `vim`). Such an editor is useful because editing `cygwin` files with Microsoft software (_e.g._, `NotePad`) can seriously corrupt files by changing line endings for Unix-style line feeds to Windows style carriage returns and line feeds.

The basic `cygwin` should now be set up. You can run it to open a `cygwin` command-line window and browse your files. By the default, all `cygwin` files will be in the folder `C:\cygwin`. Your home folder will usually be at `/home/YOURUSERNAME`. You are now ready to [Download_Project download the code].